The Burau representation is faithful for n = 4
Vasudha Bharathram

Joan S. Birman

Tara E. Brendle

arXiv:2607.05283v1 [math.GT] 6 Jul 2026

July 7, 2026
Abstract
In this paper we use ideas introduced earlier by Moody [Moo91], Long [Lon86], Long–Paton [LP93]
and Bigelow [Big99] to prove the theorem of the title, that the Burau representation of the classical braid
group B4 is faithful. An immediate corollary is that the Jones representation of B4 is also faithful.

1

Introduction

Let Dn be a disk with n marked points p1 , p2 , . . . , pn in its interior. The braid group Bn will be interpreted
in this paper as the mapping class group Mod(Dn ). In 1935 Werner Burau introduced a representation of
Bn into GLn−1 (Z[t, t−1 ]), now known as the reduced Burau representation [Bur35]. We will work mainly
with the unreduced Burau representation ρn : Bn → GLn (Z[t, t−1 ]), and henceforth we refer to ρn simply as
the Burau representation.
Magnus–Peluso first established the faithfulness of the Burau representation for n = 3 by a direct algebraic
calculation [MP69]. Moody later proved that ρn is not faithful for n ≥ 9 [Moo91]. Long–Paton built on
Moody’s ideas to improve this to n ≥ 6 [LP93], and Bigelow later added the case n = 5 [Big99].
In the years following Bigelow’s paper there have been many attempts to detect elements in the kernel of the
remaining case ρ4 , or to narrow the search for such, each of which contributed to our understanding of this
question as viewed through the lens of various areas of mathematics; see for example Alperin–Farb–Noskov
[AFN02], Beridze–Traczyk [BT18a, BT18b], Calvez–Ito [CI17], Datta [Dat22], Dlugie [Dlu24], Fullarton–
Shadrach [FS19], Gibson–Williamson–Yacobi [GWY25], and Witzel–Zaremsky [WZ15]. The question of
faithfulness for ρ4 also appears as Question 3.1 in Margalit’s problem list for mapping class groups [Mar19].
Main Theorem. The Burau representation ρ4 of B4 is faithful.
As a first step to proving this result, we will give a new and simple topological proof of the faithfulness of
the Burau representation in the case n = 3. We will then adapt these ideas to the case of n = 4 by exploiting
the structure of point-pushing maps in B4 .
This approach is in contrast to earlier work on Bn for n ≥ 5 and attempts to prove that the Burau representation ρ4 is not faithful. In particular, we do not consider elements in the image of ρ4 that potentially
generate a free group. We refer the reader to the second author’s book [Bir74, Theorem 3.19], where this
approach was first introduced. In addition to the papers mentioned above, see also Bigelow [Big99, Section
3] and Moran [Mor91] for details of other approaches.
Application to the Jones representation. In his seminal work, Jones introduced a representation of
the braid group that contains the (reduced) Burau representation as a summand; for a full definition we
refer the reader to his paper [Jon87]. As Jones points out, the faithfulness of Burau representation ρn for
1

any n implies the faithfulness of the Jones representation of the braid group Bn . Therefore we immediately
obtain the following corollary of our Main Theorem.
Corollary 1.1. The Jones representation of Bn is faithful for n = 4.
We also refer the reader to Kasahara’s subsequent work on the Jones representation, in particular to his
explanation of the equivalence between the faithfulness of the Burau representation and the Jones representation in the case n = 4 [Kas08, Remark 5.6].
Strategy of proof. Let Ki denote the point-pushing subgroup of Bn obtained as the kernel of the Birman
exact sequence for the disk Dn by “forgetting” the ith marked point in the disk Dn ; see Section 5 for more
details. The intersection ∩ni=1 Ki of all point-pushing subgroups in Bn is known as the Brunnian group Brunn ,
and it is a normal subgroup of Bn . A theorem of Long states that the Burau represention ρn is faithful on
Bn if it is faithful on any nontrivial noncentral normal subgroup of Bn [Lon86, Theorem 2.2]. Suppose now
that ker(ρ4 ) were nontrivial. By Long’s theorem, ker(ρ4 ) intersects Brun4 nontrivially.
Proposition 1.2. If the Burau representation ρ4 is faithful on its restriction to the Brunnian group Brun4 ,
then it is faithful on B4 .
Building on ideas of Long–Paton and Bigelow, we associate to each braid in Bn a sequence of disks in Dn
that carry certain combinatorial data. We use this technology to give a new proof of Magnus–Peluso’s
theorem that the Burau representation ρ3 is faithful [MP69]. Our proof yields the more general result that
any n-strand braid whose associated disk sequence satisfies a certain parity condition, defined in Section 4,
does not lie in the kernel of ρn .
Braids in Bn do not in general satisfy this parity condition when n ≥ 4. However, we show that when n = 4,
the parity condition “almost” holds for any point-pushing braid Φ ∈ K4 that admits a factorization as a
proper product of certain push-maps. The next step is to “correct” Φ by embedding K4 in B5 , that is, we
use Φ to construct a 5-braid satisfying the parity condition. We then apply a result of Moody to conclude
that the original braid Φ ∈ K4 does not lie in the kernel of ρ4 . The final step is to show that any braid in
K4 is conjugate to another braid in K4 that can be realized as a proper product of push-maps.
Finally, we remark that, a priori, it is not necessarily clear that Brunn is nontrivial. The simplest example
of a Brunnian braid is a three-strand braid that closes to form the Borromean rings. Figure 1.1 gives
an example of a nontrivial element of Brun4 , the case of interest to us, and a similar construction yields
nontrivial examples of Brunnian braids in Bn for any n. Moreover, Whittlesey has shown that all nontrivial
Brunnian braids are pseudo-Anosov [Whi00]. We note that Whittlesey’s results are stated for the mapping
class group of the (n + 1)-punctured sphere, but the result holds in Bn ; see Lee-Song’s discussion of this
point [LS05, Section 1].

Figure 1.1: A Brunnian 4-braid β.

Kernel and image of Burau. There is a great deal of literature on the faithfulness of the Burau representation, and this paper settles that question in the final outstanding case. The questions of giving both a
useful characterization of its kernel and of its image remain wide open in general, and the authors believe
that the methods of this paper may be useful in achieving progress on these important questions.
2

Outline of the paper. In Section 2, we introduce the Moody polynomial of a braid, an invariant that
provides an obstruction for an element to lie in the kernel of the Burau representation. Building on Moody’s
ideas and their development by Long–Paton, Bigelow later introduced combinatorial tools that are useful
for computing the obstruction; we describe these in Section 3. Using these tools, in Section 4, we give our
new topological proof of faithfulness of the Burau representation in the case n = 3. We introduce our key
technical tool, proper products of point-pushing braids, in Section 5. In Section 6 we construct point-pushing
maps arising as particular proper products, and use these to establish that the Burau representation ρ4 is
faithful on its restriction to the point-pushing group Brun4 ; by Proposition 1.2, this completes the proof of
the Main Theorem. Finally, we give an example illustrating the constructions used in our proof in Section 7.
Acknowledgements. The authors heartily thank Dan Margalit for many helpful discussions and are
especially grateful for his extensive and valuable feedback on initial drafts of this paper. The second author
would also like to thank him for his interest in this project from its inception seven years ago, when the first
two authors had begun to work on it together. The authors also thank Michael Dougherty and Benson Farb
for additional helpful comments on an early draft and Ken Birman for further helpful remarks. The first
author thanks David Gabai for his invaluable mentorship and constant encouragement. The third author
is also grateful to the Institute for Computational and Experimental Research in Mathematics (ICERM) at
Brown University, where in 2022 she was a participant in the semester-long program “Braids”, during which
initial discussions that led to her joining this project took place, and to Muffy Calder for her support and
encouragement throughout. AI was used to proofread a draft of the manuscript.

2

The Moody polynomial and winding numbers

While Burau originally defined his representation by giving its values on the standard Artin generators of
Bn (see, for example, [BB05, Section 4.2]), it will be more useful for present purposes to define ρn via the
action of Bn on the disk Dn , which we consider here as an n-times punctured disk. Let p∗ denote a point
in the boundary of the disk Dn , and let x1 , . . . , xn denote the standard free generators of π1 (Dn , p∗ ). We
consider the mapping π1 (Dn , p∗ ) → Z that takes a word in x1 , . . . xn to the sum of its exponents, and let
fn denote the covering space associated with its kernel.
D
fn is isomorphic to Z, which we denote as a multiplicative group
The group of covering transformations of D
generated by t. Following the treatment of Long–Paton, it will be convenient for us to work with the relative
fn , {pe∗ }), where {pe∗ } denotes the full pre-image of the basepoint p∗ in the cover D
fn .
homology group H1 (D
−1
f
The braid group Bn acts on the Z[t, t ]-module H1 (Dn , {pe∗ }), which is free of rank n; this action is the
unreduced Burau representation ρn , which we will refer to simply as the Burau representation.
We next record a basic fact that follows directly from the definition of ρn .
Observation 2.1. Let f : Bn → Bn+1 be the inclusion map corresponding to the standard embedding of Dn
into Dn+1 . If Φ ∈ Bn lies in the kernel of ρn , then f (Φ) lies in the kernel of ρn+1 .
Observation 2.1 will be crucial in our proof of the Main Theorem.
Moody polynomials. In what follows, we will closely follow Bigelow’s notation and exposition [Big99].
We will use the term arc to refer to a proper embedding of an interval in the disk Dn and subarc to refer to
its restriction to a compact connected subinterval. Our arcs will normally be oriented, and it will often be
convenient to consider arcs in terms of their image in the disk Dn rather than as functions per se.
Let α and β be two oriented arcs in Dn , considered as a disk with marked points, whose endpoints lie in
fn . We define the Moody polynomial
the set {p1 , . . . , pn , p∗ }, and choose two corresponding lifts α̃ and β̃ in D
−1
M(α, β) ∈ Z[t, t ] of the oriented arcs α and β as follows:
X
M(α, β) =
(tℓ · α̃, β̃)tℓ
ℓ∈Z

3

...

+ −

p1

+

−

p2

−

+ −

p3

p4

+

+

−

p1

+

−

+

p2

−

p3

+

−

p4

+ −

+ −

+

p1

p2

p3

−

+ −

...

p4

t0
t1
t2
f4 of the disk D4 .
Figure 2.1: The zeroth, first, and second “decks” in the universal cyclic cover D
fn . We note
where (tℓ · α̃, β̃) denotes the algebraic intersection number of the lift tℓ · α̃ with β̃ in the cover D
that the algebraic intersection number of arcs does not include intersections at any shared endpoints; in our
case, we will always choose our arcs so that the endpoints of α are disjoint from those of β. We also note
that the Moody polynomial M(α, β) is only well defined up to multiplication by a power of t, due to its
dependence on our choice of the lifts α̃ and β̃. Our convention will be to choose our lifts so that the first
point at which β crosses α is assigned the monomial ±t0 .
Following Bigelow [Big99] and Long–Paton [LP93], we now describe a planar interpretation of the Moody
polynomial that enables us to work entirely in the base space Dn rather then in the cover. Without loss of
generality, we can assume that the oriented arcs α and β intersect transversely in finitely many points; we
label these q1 , . . . , qm according to the order in which they appear as we traverse the arc β according to its
orientation. Each intersection point qi corresponds to a single point of intersection between two lifts α̃ and
β̃, and hence each point qi contributes a monomial ±tki to the overall sum in the Moody polynomial. Here
the exponent ki is such that β̃ and tki · α̃ cross at a lift of qi , and the sign ϵi of the monomial is the sign
of that crossing where ϵi ∈ {−1, 1}. Then an equivalent formulation of the Moody polynomial of the arcs α
and β is as follows:
m
X
ϵi tki .
M(α, β) =
i=1

We emphasize that it may happen that ki = kj for i ̸= j. Indeed, our business in this paper will be to
determine conditions under which this could happen. When we write the Moody polynomial as the sum
of m terms of the form ϵi tki without combining like terms, we will refer to this as the unsimplified Moody
polynomial; when we combine all like terms we will refer to this as the simplified Moody polynomial. Moody
showed that the polynomial M(α, β) completely encodes the faithfulness of the Burau representation [Moo91].
We will use one direction of his characterization; see Theorem 2.3.
Conventions and color-coding. For the remainder of this paper, we will always choose the arc α to be
the horizontal arc joining p1 to p2 oriented from left to right, and we will color it blue in all figures, as
shown in Figure 2.2. We also let β∗3 denote the oriented arc shown in Figure 2.2 from the basepoint p∗ to
the puncture p3 and color it red.
When we apply a braid Φ ∈ Bn to the arc β∗3 , we will usually denote this by β = (β∗3 )Φ and also color β red;
note that we write Φ on the right of the arc to which we are applying it because we will follow the tradition
of writing multiplication of braids from left to right.
Furthermore, from this point on, a blue (respectively red) arc will always be a subarc of α (respectively β).
Later we will add gold to our list of special colors. Our sign convention will be to say that qi is a positive
crossing, that is, ϵi = 1, if β is directed downwards at qi and that qi is a negative crossing with ϵi = −1 if β
is directed upwards at qi .
For any arcs γ and δ in the disk Dn , we let ι(γ, δ) denote their geometric intersection number. Consider
now our fixed choice of arc α. A remarkable result of Moody states that the non-faithfulness of the Burau

4

p1

p2

p3

p4

α
β∗3
p∗
Figure 2.2: The blue arc α joins p1 to p2 . The red arc β∗3 joins the basepoint on ∂D to the point p3 .
representation is equivalent to the existence of an arc β joining the basepoint p∗ to the marked point p3 in
Dn such that ι(α, β) > 0 and M(α, β) = 0 [Moo91]. With this in mind, we define the Moody polynomial of
the braid Φ ∈ Bn as follows:
MΦ = M(α, (β∗3 )Φ).
We remark that by taking the boundary of a regular neighborhood of the arc (β∗3 )Φ, we can view as a loop
based at p∗ traveling around p3 , and that MΦ is well defined on the homology class of a lift of [(β∗3 )Φ] in
fn , {pe∗ }), which we denote by [(β∗3 )Φ]. We also emphasize that an element Φ ∈ Bn uniquely determines
H1 (D
an arc β = (β∗3 )Φ, but the converse does not hold: there exist infinitely many pairs Φ1 , Φ2 ∈ Bn for which
(β∗3 )Φ1 = (β∗3 )Φ2 . We refer the reader to Long–Paton [LP93, Section 1] and Bigelow [Big99, Theorem 1.4]
for further details. For our purposes, we do not need the full strength of Moody’s result; we will only require
one direction of the equivalence.
Theorem 2.2 (Moody). Let n ≥ 3. If, given any oriented arc β from p∗ to p3 such that ι(α, β) > 0, we
have that M(α, β) ̸= 0, then the Burau representation ρn is faithful. Equivalently, if we have that MΦ ̸= 0,
for any braid Φ such that Φ(p3 ) = p3 and ι(α, (β3∗ )Φ) > 0, then the Burau representation ρn is faithful.
The equivalence of the two statements follows from the fact that every oriented arc β from p∗ to p3 arises as
β = (β∗3 )Φ for some Φ ∈ Bn by the change of coordinates principle; note that such a braid Φ necessarily fixes
the point p3 . It will be useful for our purposes to adapt Moody’s theorem to obtain a specific obstruction
to an individual braid lying in the kernel of ρn , for which we give a short proof for the sake of completeness.
Theorem 2.3 (Moody). Let Φ ∈ Bn for n ≥ 3. If MΦ·Γ ̸= MΓ for some Γ ∈ Bn , then Φ does not lie in the
kernel of ρn .
Proof. Suppose that Φ lies in the kernel of ρn . Then Γ−1 ·Φ·Γ must also lie in the kernel. We have that (β∗3 )·Γ
fn relative to the pre-image of a basepoint.
corresponds to an element [(β∗3 ) · Γ] in the homology of the cover D
−1
Since Γ · Φ · Γ acts trivially on this homology group, we have that [(β∗3 ) · (Φ · Γ)] = [((β∗3 ) · Γ) · (Γ−1 · Φ · Γ)] =
[(β∗3 ) · Γ]. The result now follows from our previous observation that MΦ well defined on the homology class
fn , {pe∗ }).
[(β∗3 )Φ] in H1 (D
In Section 6 we will identify certain products of braids in B4 to which we will then apply Theorem 2.3 in
order to establish the faithfulness of ρ4 . Moreover, as discussed in Section 1, we ultimately reduce our search
to the Brunnian subgroup Brunn in Bn , where all nontrivial braids are pseudo-Anosov, and hence for all
Φ ∈ Brunn we have that ι(α, (β∗3 ) · Φ) > 0. We will also use the following special case of Theorem 2.3.
Corollary 2.4. Let Φ ∈ Bn for n ≥ 3. If MΦ ̸= 0, then Φ does not lie in the kernel of ρn .

5

3

Disk sequences and total winding number

Let β = (β∗3 )Φ, and as above, we label the points of intersection of α with β by q1 , . . . , qm according to the
order in which we encounter them as we travel along β. For i = 1, . . . m − 1, we let αi and βi denote the
subarcs of α and β, respectively, that join the intersection point qi to qi+1 . Note that, with our choice of
notation, this means that each arc βi contains no intersection point qj in its interior, while an arc αi may
contain a number of other intersection points in its interior.
By construction, for each i = 1, . . . m − 1, we have that αi ∪ βi bounds a k-punctured disk ∆i . We define the
total winding number Wi associated to the disk ∆i to be equal to k if βi is oriented clockwise with respect
to ∆i , or to be equal to −k otherwise. We will refer to the sequence W1 , . . . , Wm−1 as the winding number
sequence of Φ, and to the sequence ∆1 , ∆2 , . . . , ∆m−1 as the disk sequence of Φ; see Figure 3.1 for examples.
We will consider two such disks ∆i , ∆j to be equivalent if there is an isotopy of (Dn , α) taking the βcomponent of ∂∆i to the the β-component of ∂∆j ; in other words α is fixed setwise and the endpoints of
the β-arc must be contained in α at each level of the isotopy). We note that this notion of equivalence
corresponds to allowing isotopies of the arc β in the disk Dn .
We will see that the combinatorial data of the winding number sequence is sufficient for determining the
faithfulness of the Burau representation in the case n = 3, and that the more detailed information of the
disk sequence is required in the case n = 4. The following lemma appears as a remark in Bigelow’s paper
[Big99, Section 3]. His remark describes the relationship between winding numbers and the degree ki of the
monomial that each intersection point qi contributes to the Moody polynomial.

(a)

(b)

Figure 3.1: The arcs α and β in (a) give rise to a singleton winding number sequence given by W1 = 1,
with corresponding Moody polynomial 1 − t. The winding number sequence for the arcs in (b) is given by
1, 1, −1, −2, 1; its Moody polynomial is 2 − 2t + t2 − t−1 .
Lemma 3.1 (Bigelow [Big99]). Let qi and qi+1 be two points in α ∩ β that are consecutive with respect to
the oriented arc β, and let ki and ki+1 be the exponents of the monomials corresponding to qi and qi+1 . If
Wi denotes the ith term in the winding number sequence for β, then we have:
Wi = ki+1 − ki .

(1)

We record here the following useful corollary of Lemma 3.1, also observed by Bigelow:
Corollary 3.2. Let W1 , . . . , Wm be a winding number sequence for a braid in Bn , and let ki and kj be the
exponents of the Moody monomials corresponding to two points qi and qj in α ∩ β. Then ki = kj if and only
Pj−1
if k=i Wk = 0.
Equipped with this useful criterion for tracking repeats of an exponent occurring in the Moody polynomial,
we will proceed in the next section to consider the question of faithfulness of ρn when n = 3.

6

4

Faithfulness for three strands

The following theorem was first proved by Magnus and Peluso in 1969 using purely algebraic methods. We
give a new proof.
Theorem 4.1 (Magnus–Peluso [MP69]). The Burau representation ρ3 is faithful.
Proof. Using the same notation as in the previous section, we let Φ ∈ B3 be an element such that the
geometric intersection of α and β = (β∗3 )Φ is equal to m > 0.
2.2, it suffices to show that
PmBy Theorem
ki
any single term of the simplified Moody polynomial MΦ =
ϵ
t
is
nonzero.
If m = 1, then the
i=1 i
Moody polynomial consists of a single linear term, and hence is nonzero. Suppose now that m > 1, and let
W1 , . . . , Wm−1 denote the winding number sequence of the braid Φ. Each corresponding disk is bounded by
a subarc of α and a subarc of β and contains 1, 2, or 3 marked points. The assumption that α and β are in
minimal position then implies that, up to reflection about the coordinate axes and up to homeomorphism of
the disk preserving each marked point pi pointwise and the arc α setwise, each disk in the disk sequence is
equivalent to one of the three types of regions illustrated in Figure 4.1, possibly after applying a symmetry.

(a) |Wi | = 1

(b) |Wi | = 2

(c) |Wi | = 3

Figure 4.1: Possible disks in the disk sequence of an element of B3 .
Notice that for each i such that |Wi | = 2, the sign ϵi of the two points of intersection of β with α must be
the same, that is, ϵi = ϵi+1 . Furthermore, if |Wi | ∈ {1, 3}, then we have that ϵi = −ϵi+1 .
Pj−1
Suppose now that ki = kj for two distinct terms in the unsimplified Moody polynomial. Then ℓ=i Wℓ = 0
by Corollary 3.2. Hence for i ≤ ℓ ≤ j − 1 we must have an even number of terms Wℓ with |Wℓ | ∈ {1, 3}. By
our observations in the previous paragraph, it follows that ϵi = ϵj . In other words, no cancellation among
terms of degree ki can occur in the summation above. It follows that the Moody polynomial of Φ is not
equal to zero, and therefore the Burau representation of B3 is faithful.
The parity condition. We note that the only information that we used in the proof of Theorem 4.1 was
the fact that disks containing an odd number of punctures correspond to a change of sign of corresponding
coefficients in the Moody polynomial, while disks containing an even number of punctures preserve the sign
of the corresponding coefficients. We will record this key observation as a lemma.
To make this precise, let qi be a point of intersection of the oriented arcs α and β. As in Section 2, we let
ϵi denote the algebraic intersection number î(β, α) at qi . If ∆ is a disk in the sequence for Φ corresponding
to the pair of points qi , qi+1 ∈ α ∩ β ∈ ∂∆, then we will say that ∆ is sign-changing if ϵi = −ϵi+1 and
sign-preserving otherwise. Let P(∆) denote the set of marked points in Dn that are contained in the interior
of ∆. We will say that a braid Φ satisfies the parity condition if a disk ∆ in its disk sequence is sign-changing
if and only if |P(∆)| is odd.
In other words, our proof of Theorem 4.1 reduces to showing that every 3-strand braid satisfies the parity
condition. Our next lemma shows that the parity condition gives a sufficient criterion for a braid Φ ∈ Bn to
not be contained in the kernel of the Burau representation ρn .
Recall from Section 2 that the Moody polynomial of a braid ϕ is given by
Mϕ =

m
X
i=1

7

ϵi tki

where each ϵi tki is the monomial associated to the i-th crossing of α and β = (β∗3 )ϕ, and where m = ι(α, β).
We say that the Moody polynomial of ϕ admits no cancellations if there is no pair of indices i, j such that
ki = kj and ϵi = −ϵj in the above expression.
Lemma 4.2. Let ϕ ∈ Bn . If ϕ satisfies the parity condition, then the Moody polynomial of ϕ admits no
cancellations.
Proof. By Corollary 3.2, if ki = kj then |P(∆i )| + · · · + |P(∆j−1 )| = 0. In particular this sum is even.
However, by the assumption that a given disk in the disk sequence is sign-changing if and only if it contains
an odd number of punctures, this means there are an even number of sign-changing disks in the subsequence
∆i , . . . , ∆j−1 . In particular we have ϵi = ϵj and so this completes the proof.
In general, n-strand braids do not satisfy the parity condition when n ≥ 4. Our strategy for proving the
Main Theorem will be to identify certain 4-braids satisfying the parity condition.

5

Push-maps and minimal position

As discussed in Section 1, in order to prove our Main Theorem, it suffices to establish that ρ4 is faithful when
restricted to the subgroup of B4 consisting of point-pushing maps, also known simply as push-maps. In light
of Lemma 4.2, our strategy will be to identify elements of this subgroup satisfying the parity condition. In
this section, as a first step in that direction, we will characterize configurations of the various arcs and curves
involved that lead to the creation of bigons between α and the image of β∗3 under the action of push-maps.
For the purpose of defining push-maps, it is convenient to use the notation Mod(Dn ) to denote the braid
group Bn . Let p ∈ Dn be one of the marked points in Dn , and let Mod(Dn , p) denote the subgroup of
Mod(Dn ) that fixes p. There is a forgetful map Mod(Dn , p) → Mod(Dn−1 ), and the Birman exact sequence
for Dn identifies the kernel of this map with π1 (Dn−1 , p):
F orget

P ush

1−
→ π1 (Dn−1 , p) −−−→ Mod(Dn , p) −−−−→ Mod(Dn−1 ) −
→1
Given a loop Γ in π1 (Dn−1 , p), we can consider the push-map obtained by pushing the point p along Γ, and
the image of π1 (Dn−1 , p) in Mod(Dn , p) ⊂ Mod(Dn ) is an example of a point-pushing subgroup. We refer
the reader to Farb-Margalit’s book for a detailed discussion of point-pushing maps and subgroups [FM12,
Section 4.2.2] .
Now, let Ki ∼
= π1 (Dn−1 , pi ) denote the point-pushing subgroup of Bn corresponding to the marked point pi
in the disk Dn ; see Figure 5.1 for an example of an element of the point-pushing group K4 in B4 and its
effect on the arc β∗3 . We remind the reader that throughout the paper, our figures show the arc α in blue
and arcs of the form β = Φ(β∗3 ) in red. Henceforth we will also show any loops representing push-maps in
gold.

α

α

β∗3

β

Figure 5.1: The gold loop represents an element of the subgroup K4 . The image β of β∗3 under the push-map
around the gold loop is shown in red on the right.

8

In this part of the paper, we do not need to restrict to the case n = 4, and so we will work in the disk Dn ,
the braid group Bn , and its subgroup Kn for n ≥ 4. Before we begin, we note the following.
• Without loss of generality, we can always choose a representative of a loop Γ that intersects itself
minimally and transversely, and hence there are finitely many points of self-intersection.
• The results in this section hold if we replace Kn with any other point-pushing subgroup Kj where
j ≥ 4.
• In this section we do not assume that our push-maps necessarily correspond to simple loops. However,
we only require simple loops in order to prove Theorem 6.6 below.
Bigon-forming polygons. Let Γ ∈ Kn , and let β be any simple arc joining p∗ to p3 . We wish to identify
local configurations of subarcs of α, β, and Γ that lead to the creation of a bigon between (β)Γ and α. As a
warm-up, suppose that as we travel along Γ there is a subarc of β that precedes a bigon between Γ and α.
Then pushing along Γ will create a bigon (in fact, two); see Figure 5.2a. Of course, in general we can avoid

Γ(2)

Γ(1)
α

(a) A bigon between Γ (gold) and α (blue).

(b) A generalized bigon of length 2 between Γ and α.

Figure 5.2
such a scenario simply by assuming that all curves are in pairwise minimal position. However, this points
us to a more general kind of phenomenon in the case where Γ is not simple: a sequence of subarcs of Γ that,
taken together, effectively form a bigon with Γ, as shown in Figure 5.2b. Then, depending on the ordering
of these subarcs (as determined by the orientation of Γ), pushing along Γ can similarly create a bigon.
To make this more precise, given two subarcs Γ(1) , Γ(2) of Γ in Dn with disjoint interiors, we will say that
Γ(1) precedes Γ(2) and write Γ(1) < Γ(2) if the initial point of Γ(1) precedes the initial point of Γ(2) as we
trace out Γ. We will further refer to a union of subarcs Γ(1) , . . . , Γ(ℓ) that are pairwise disjoint as a piecewise
Γ-arc of length ℓ if the following conditions are satisfied:
• for each i ∈ {1, . . . , ℓ − 1}, the final point of Γ(i) is a self-intersection point of Γ in Dn , such that the
final point of Γ(i) is the initial point of Γ(i+1) ;
• Γ(1) < Γ(2) < · · · < Γ(ℓ) ; and
• the union Γ(1) ∪ · · · ∪ Γ(ℓ) in Dn contains no loops.
We will now identify three types of local configurations (in addition to bigons) between α, β, and Γ that
lead to the creation of bigons between α and (β)Γ.
1. Generalized bigons. Consider now a piecewise Γ-arc γ of length ℓ where the initial point of Γ(1) and
the final point of Γ(ℓ) are both points of intersection of Γ with α, so that γ together with the α-subarc
with these two endpoints forms a (ℓ + 1)-gon in Dn containing no marked points in its interior. We will
refer to such an (ℓ + 1)-gon as a generalized bigon. Figure 5.2b shows a generalized bigon with ℓ = 2.
If the piecewise Γ-arc in a generalized bigon is preceded by a point of intersection with β, then (β)Γ
and α will form a bigon in the same way as if the piecewise Γ-arc were replaced by a single subarc of
Γ. We emphasize that the orientation and ordering of the Γ-subarcs as we traverse Γ is crucial here,
since otherwise Γ would not push the β-subarc all the way around to form a bigon between (β)Γ and
α. Finally, a “standard” bigon is a generalized bigon with a piecewise Γ-arc γ of length 1.
9

2. Generalized trigons. Figure 5.3a shows another configuration of curves that leads to the creation
of a bigon, namely a trigon in D4 whose boundary consists of a subarc from each of the arcs α and
β, and the loop Γ, where the Γ-subarc is oriented from the β-arc to the α-arc. We will refer to such
a configuration of curves as a β-to-α trigon. The orientation of the Γ-subarc is crucial here: if its
orientation were reversed, then (β)Γ does not form any bigons with α in this region. As with bigons,
we can replace the single subarc of Γ here with a piecewise Γ-arc of any length; we refer to any such
configuration as a generalized β-to-α trigon. See Figure 5.3b for an example.
Γ(2)

Γ

Γ(1)

β

α

Γ(3)

α

β

(b) A five-sided example of a generalized β-to-α trigon.

(a) A β-to-α trigon.

Figure 5.3
3. Generalized rectangles. Another configuration of curves that may create bigons between α and (β)Γ
arises when two parallel subarcs of Γ traveling between β and α form a rectangle containing no marked
points; we will call this a β-to-α rectangle. As with bigons and trigons, we can use two piecewise Γ-arcs
instead of two Γ-arcs, and we refer to any such configuration as a generalized rectangle; see Figure 5.4a
for an example. We emphasize that in the case of a generalized rectangle, we do not necessarily require
the two piecewise Γ-arcs to be disjoint. In other words, we allow “degenerate” generalized rectangles,
in which some number of the Γ-segments involved can play a role in both piecewise Γ-arcs; we will see
examples of this in the proof of the next lemma (see Figure 5.4b). Note also that every generalized
rectangle includes two crossings of Γ and α with the same sign that are adjacent, as the crossings are
ordered along α.

Γ(4)
α
α

Γ(2)

β
Γ

(a) An example of a generalized rectangle with piecewise Γ-arcs of length 1 and
length 2.

Γ(3)

β

Γ(1)

(b) A degenerate generalized rectangle formed by
Γ(1) ∪ Γ(2) ∪ Γ(3) and Γ(1) ∪ Γ(2) ∪ Γ(4) .

Figure 5.4

10

In the proof of the next lemma, we will see that generalized bigons, β-to-α trigons, and rectangles are the
only types of configurations that give rise to bigons between (β)Γ and α. Hence we will refer to these
configurations collectively as bigon-forming polygons.
Proper products. Let Φ ∈ Kn , and let β = (β∗3 )Φ. Our next step will be to establish a set of conditions
on a loop Γ based at pn that will imply (β)Γ and α are in minimal position. To that end, we let ΓI denote
the initial component of Γ, that is, the subarc of Γ from pn to the first crossing of Γ with α. Similarly, we
let ΓF denote the final component of Γ, traveling from its final crossing with α back to pn . We also let β ′
denote the β-component of the innermost disk in the disk sequence of Φ that contains only pn if such a disk
exists; otherwise we set β ′ = ∅. We say that Φ · Γ is a proper product if we can choose a representative of
the loop Γ that is in minimal position with respect to α and β, and satisfying the following two conditions:
1. there are no bigon-forming polygons between α, β, and Γ; and
2. one of the following two conditions holds:
(a) ΓI ∩ β ′ ̸= ∅; or
(b) ΓI ∩ β ′ = ∅ and ΓF ∩ β ′ = ∅.
The second condition ensures that postcomposing with Γ does not “undo” the creation (by Φ) of a disk
containing only p4 . Figure 5.5 depicts the local picture for each type of configuration: in first case (on the
left in Figure 5.5), reversing the orientation of Γ has the effect of swapping the roles of ΓI and ΓF , resulting
in a loop that does not form a proper product. In practice, we will generally be given a push-map Φ, and
then seek the second factor Γ to form a proper product with Φ. We will also refer to Φ · Γ1 · Γ2 as a proper
product if both Φ · Γ1 and (Φ · Γ1 ) · Γ2 are proper products.
β′
β′
α

α
ΓI

Figure 5.5: Two examples of the local picture for Condition 2 of a proper product Φ · Γ indicating the
initial and final components of Γ in each case; reversing the orientation of Γ in the left-hand figure gives a
non-example.
The next lemma gives a straightforward criterion for ensuring that the product of two push-maps does not
yield any bigons between α and the image of β∗3 under the product.
Proposition 5.1. Let Φ ∈ Kn , and let β = Φ(β∗3 ). If Γ is a loop based at pn such that Φ · Γ is a proper
product, then the arcs (β)Γ and α are in minimal position.
Proof. We begin by choosing a specific representative of Γ so that α, β and Γ are pairwise in minimal position
with no triple points of intersection. Up to isotopy we can assume that (β)Γ and α are transverse in Dn .
Consider now a point s ∈ (β)Γ ∩ α. If s also lies in β ∩ α we will refer to this as an original point of
intersection; otherwise we say that s is a new point of intersection.
Suppose now that α and (β)Γ form a bigon, and suppose further that the two vertices of this bigon are both
new points of intersection. New points of intersection occur when a β-subarc precedes an α-subarc as we
travel along Γ. Therefore our two vertices correspond to adjacent crossings of Γ and α of the same sign or of
different signs, as shown in Figure 5.6. If they are the same sign, this implies the existence of a generalized
11

(β)Γ

α

Γ

Figure 5.6: On the left two subarcs of Γ intersect β with the same sign; on the right two subarcs of Γ intersect
β with different signs.
rectangle between Γ, α, and β, which contradicts our assumption that Φ · Γ is a proper product. If they are
different signs, this implies the existence of a generalized bigon between Γ and α, which again contradicts
our assumption that Φ · Γ is a proper product. Therefore at least one vertex of any bigon between α and
(β)Γ must be an original point of intersection.
Now, the support of the push-map Γ is a regular neighborhood of Γ in Dn . Hence we can decompose (β)Γ
as the union of subarcs of β that are fixed by Γ, which we refer to as original subarcs, together with new
subarcs that lie in the support of Γ. Each of the new subarcs is one of four types: (I) joins an original subarc
to a new point of intersection, (II) joins two new points of intersection forming part of the boundary of a
disk bounding pn , (III) joins two original subarcs, or (IV) joins two new points of intersection in a disk not
containing only pn .

(I)

(III)

(II)

(IV)

Figure 5.7: Subarcs of types (I)-(IV): here original subarcs of β appear in red, while new subarcs of β are
colored purple.
Suppose now that the vertices s1 , s2 of our bigon are both original points of intersection. Then the subarc
of (β)Γ that joins s1 to s2 cannot contain any new subarcs of type (I), type (II), or type (III) and must
therefore contain a new subarc of type (IV). It follows that we have two subarcs β ′ ⊂ β and α′ ⊂ α satisfying
the following three statements:
• the union α′ ∪ β ′ does not form a bigon;
• the union α′ ∪ (β ′ )Γ forms a bigon; and
• the intersection α′ ∩ (β ′ )Γ = α′ ∩ β ′ = {s1 , s2 }.

12

The disk bounded by α′ ∪ β ′ in Dn must contain at least one marked point, since we are assuming that α and
β are in minimal position. If the disk bounded by α′ ∪ β ′ contained pi for some i ̸= n, then the disk bounded
by α′ ∪ (β ′ )Γ would also contain pi , but this is not possible since α′ ∪ (β ′ )Γ bounds a bigon. Therefore the
disk bounded by α′ ∪ β ′ contains only the marked point pn . We must also have that the final component
ΓF of Γ intersects β ′ in a single point, since α′ ∪ (β ′ )Γ does not contain pn . Moreover, no other subarc of Γ
can intersect β ′ , as otherwise α′ ∪ (β ′ )Γ would not form a bigon. In particular, it follows that ΓI intersects
α′ ∪ (β ′ )Γ in a single point in α′ . Hence the loop Γ must intersect the disk bounded by α′ ∪ β ′ as shown in
Figure 5.8. However, such a configuration contradicts the fact that Φ · Γ is a proper product. Therefore the
vertices s1 and s2 cannot both be original points of intersection.
α′
s1

pn
β′

ΓI

s2

Γ

ΓF

Figure 5.8: A new bigon involving two original points of intersection s1 and s2 between α and β must arise
from a configuration of curves as depicted.
It remains to consider the case in which precisely one vertex of our bigon between α and (β)Γ is an original
point of intersection; we denote this vertex by s1 . The other vertex s2 must therefore be a new point of
intersection formed when Γ meets a subarc of β and pushes it along until it crosses α. Without loss of
generality, we can assume that s2 is the new point of intersection to the left of the loop Γ, as shown in
Figure 5.9.
s1
s2

β
Γ

s2

α

Figure 5.9: The simplest case where a bigon between α and (β)Γ involves precisely one original point of
intersection.
Then there are two possible candidate regions for a bigon with s2 as a vertex: one to the left of α as shown
in the figure, and one to the right. In each case, the vertex s1 lies along α on the same side of Γ as s2 in the
local picture shown in Figure 5.9. In the first case, there must be a piecewise Γ-arc forming a generalized
β-to-α trigon with s2 corresponding to its final point of intersection with α, which contradicts that Φ · Γ
is a proper product; see Figure 5.10. The second case also cannot occur, since this would imply that (β)Γ
continues on along a new subarc from s2 to s1 to form our bigon, which in turn implies that Γ itself must form
a generalized bigon with β and that s1 is also a new point of intersection, both of which are contradictions.
The proposition follows.
In the next section, we will restrict our attention to the case n = 4.

6

Disk sequences in the 4-strand braid group

The aim of this section is to prove Theorem 6.6 below, which states that the Burau representation ρ4 is faithful
on its restriction to the point-pushing group K4 . By Proposition 1.2, this will imply our Main Theorem.
Our strategy for proving Theorem 6.6 is to use proper products to identify certain braids that satisfy the
parity condition. This will allow us to apply Moody’s theorem (Theorem 2.3) to establish faithfulness.
13

α

β
Γ

Figure 5.10: A possible bigon that arises from a generalized trigon. The oriented arcs in gold are subarcs of
a loop Γ.

6.1

Disks and parity in B4

We begin with a careful analysis of the types of disks that can arise in the disk sequence of a 4-strand braid.
To that end, we introduce some useful notation: for a disk ∆ contained in D4 , we let P(∆) denote the set
of marked points that are contained in the interior of ∆, and hence P(∆) ⊆ {p1 , p2 , p3 , p4 }. We note that
up to this point in the paper we have not used the assumption that n = 4. We will use that assumption in
this section, particularly in Lemmas 6.1 and 6.3.
Lemma 6.1. Let ∆ be a disk arising in the disk sequence of an element of B4 . Then ∆ is sign-preserving
if and only if P(∆) is one of the following:
{p1 , p3 }, {p1 , p4 }, {p2 , p3 }, {p2 , p4 }, {p1 , p3 , p4 }, {p2 , p3 , p4 }.
Moreover, ∆ is sign-changing if and only if P(∆) is one of the following:
{p3 }, {p4 }, {p3 , p4 }, {p1 , p2 , p3 }, {p1 , p2 , p4 }, {p1 , p2 , p3 , p4 }.
Proof. Let ∆ be a disk in the disk sequence of an element Φ ∈ B4 , and let q and q ′ denote the two points
of intersection between α and β = (β∗3 )Φ that lie in ∂∆. Without loss of generality, we assume that q lies
between p1 and q ′ on α, and that q precedes q ′ as we traveling along β.
Suppose that P(∆) = {p1 }. Since β and α intersect transversely at q, the subarc of β joining the basepoint
p∗ to q must intersect ∂∆. Hence this subarc either intersects the β component of ∂∆ or the subarc of α
with endpoints q and q ′ . The former contradicts our assumption that β is simple, and the latter contradicts
our assumption that β and α are in minimal position. Therefore P(∆) ̸= {p1 }. By a similar argument, we
see that P(∆) ̸= {p2 } and that P(∆) ̸= {p1 , p2 }.
We next claim that ∆ is sign-preserving if and only if it contains precisely one of the two endpoints of α;
the lemma follows immediately from the claim. Suppose first that ∆ is sign-preserving. Without loss of
generality, we assume that β is oriented down (in our standard picture where α is horizontal) at both q and
q ′ , and that ∆ contains p1 ; see Figure 6.1.
Then ∂∆ is the union of a subarc of β and a subarc of α, both with endpoints q, q ′ , and the interior of ∆
lies to the right of β as we travel along β from q to q ′ . This implies that ∆ does not contain the subarc
of α with endpoints q ′ and p2 ; in particular ∆ does not contain p2 . A similar argument shows that if ∆ is
sign-changing and contains p1 , then it also contains p2 . The claim follows, and we are done.

14

q
q′

Figure 6.1: A sign-preserving disk

6.2

The point-pushing subgroup K4

Our focus in the remainder of this section will be the point-pushing subgroup K4 . Our next step will be
to analyze the types of disks that can appear in the disk sequence of certain braids in K4 . Specifically,
we will be constructing proper products of certain elements in K4 to which we can apply Lemma 4.2. We
will then analyze the corresponding disk sequences, which will ultimately provide a mechanism for applying
Theorem 2.3.
Lemma 6.2. Let Φ ∈ K4 , let Γ ∈ K4 be a push-map along a simple loop, and suppose that Φ = Ψ · Γ is
a proper product. Let ∆1 , . . . , ∆m−1 denote the disk sequence of Φ. Then, for any fixed i, either ∆i is a
1-disk containing only p4 , or there is an isotopy of β = (β∗3 )Φ so that the β-component of the boundary ∆i
is disjoint from Γ.
Before giving the proof, we emphasize that Lemma 6.2 only guarantees that the β-component of any single
disk ∆i can be isotoped off Γ. It does not guarantee that each such β-component can be isotoped off
Γ simultaneously; indeed, this is not possible in general. We also introduce some notation that will be
convenient in the proof of the lemma and in what follows: if γ is an arc or a loop in the disk Dn , we will
refer to a disk whose boundary is the union of a single subarc of α together with a single subarc of γ as an
α-γ disk.
Proof. Let β ′ = (β∗3 )Ψ. Again, we choose fixed representatives of Γ and α that are in minimal position. By
Proposition 5.1, we may choose a representative of β ′ so that (β ′ )Γ is in minimal position with respect to
α. Since Γ is a simple loop , we can represent the action of the push-map Γ via the schematic in Figure 6.2.
Figure 6.2b shows the resulting local picture for β = (β∗3 )Φ after pushing β ′ along Γ, possibly creating a
α
β
Γ1

(a) The local picture of pushing along Γ1 .

(b) Pushing the first β strand

Figure 6.2: Here blue arcs represent subarcs of α, while red/pink arcs represent subarcs of β.
number of new disks in the associated disk sequence. For each such disk that does not contain p4 , Figure 6.2b
shows that its β-component is disjoint from Γ. For the remaining α-β disks in Figure 6.2b, there is an isotopy
of β in Dn that preserves the disk sequence while removing the intersection of the β-component of these disks
from Γ. This isotopy can be visualized by sliding the “topmost” part of any β-component of the boundary
of a disk that intersects Γ in Figure 6.2b upwards along the rightmost subarc of α that appears in the local
picture; one can perform a single isotopy that moves all such β-subarcs simultaneously off Γ.
15

A particular push-map.

Let Γ1 be the push-map corresponding to the loop shown in Figure 6.3.

Figure 6.3: A particular push map Γ1 .
Lemma 6.3. Let Φ ∈ K4 , let Γ1 ∈ K4 be the push-map along the simple loop shown in Figure 6.3, and
suppose that Φ = Ψ · Γ1 is a proper product. Let ∆ be a disk arising in the disk sequence of Φ. Then ∆ is
sign-preserving if and only if P(∆) is the following:
{p2 , p3 }.
Moreover, ∆ is sign-changing if and only if P(∆) is one of the following:
{p3 }, {p4 }, {p1 , p2 , p3 }, {p1 , p2 , p3 , p4 }.
Proof. By Lemma 6.2 any disk ∆ in the disk sequence of Φ can have its β-component isotoped off of Γ1 .
Referring to Figure 6.4, we see that, up to equivalence, there are only finitely many possible β-subarcs
forming an α-β disk that is disjoint from Γ1 .

p2

p1

p4

p3

Figure 6.4: The loop Γ1 is shown in gold, together with red arcs indicating all possible disks arising in the
disk sequence of a braid in K4 such that the β-component of the disk can be isotoped off of Γ1 .
The five possible types of disk that can arise up to equivalence are shown in Figure 6.5 using our standard
embedding of α and Γ1 in D4 .

16

δ1
δ2

δ3

δ4

δ5

Figure 6.5: The loop Γ1 is shown in gold, together with five red arcs δ1 , . . . , δ5 indicating all five types of
disks arising in the disk sequence of a braid in K4 such that the β-component of the disk can be isotoped
off of Γ1 .

6.3

Embedding in B5

Under the hypotheses of Lemma 6.3, there is only one possible type of disk arising in the disk sequence
of a braid in K4 that violates the parity condition: a disk containing all four punctures. In order to deal
with this, we will pass briefly to the setting of the disk with five punctures. To that end, we now fix an
embedding of D4 in the disk D5 ; we can think of this as simply fixing an additional marked point p5 in the
interior of the disk D4 . If Φ ∈ B4 , we let f (Φ) ∈ B5 denote the image of Φ in B5 under the induced injection
f : B4 ,→ B5 . We emphasize that throughout this section, the notation Γ1 refers to the particular push-map
shown in Figure 6.3, while Γ refers to a push-map that generally depends on some other element Φ ∈ K4 .
Proposition 6.4. Let Φ ∈ B4 , and suppose that Φ can be written as a proper product Φ = Φ′ · Γ1 . Then
there exists a push-map Γ ∈ K5 such that f (Φ) · Γ is a proper product in B5 and such that both f (Φ) · Γ and
Γ satisfy the parity condition. Furthermore we may choose Γ so that ι(β∗3 · (Φ · Γ), α) ̸= ι(β∗3 · Γ, α).
Before we begin the proof of Proposition 6.4, we recall that an α-γ disk is a disk whose boundary is the
union of a single subarc of α together with a single subarc of γ, where γ is a loop or an arc. In the case
where γ is a union of two or more subarcs of a larger loop or arc Γ, we will also refer to such a disk as an
α-Γ disk for convenience.
Proof. Suppose that the braid Φ ∈ B4 does not satisfy the parity condition. By Lemma 6.3 there must be
at least one disk ∆ in its disk sequence with P(∆) = {p1 , p2 , p3 , p4 }. Moreover, any 4-disks that occur in its
disk sequence are necessarily nested in D4 . Consider the image f (Φ) of our braid in B5 . We will construct
a push-map Γ ∈ K5 whose effect will be to replace each of the 4-disks in the disk sequence of f (Φ) with a
5-disk while preserving every other disk.
Let β denote the arc (β∗3 )f (Φ) in the disk D5 , and choose a point q in the interior of the innermost 4-disk
of β such that q is not contained in a k-disk in the disk sequence of f (Φ) for any k ≤ 3. Since the arc β is
17

simple, its complement in the disk D5 is connected, and hence we can choose a simple path γ1 from p5 to q
such that ι(γ1 , β) = 0; see Figure 6.6 for an example. We note that γ1 necessarily intersects α, since q lies
in the interior of the disk ∆ and p5 does not.

q
γ2
p5

γ1

β

D4 ⊆ D5
Figure 6.6: An example of the construction of the loop Γ = γ1 ∪ γ2 .
Next we choose a simple path γ2 from q to p5 that is disjoint from α and not isotopic to γ1 , such that the
intersection of γ2 and β consists of precisely one point in the β-component of each 4-disk in the disk sequence
of Φ. In other words, γ2 travels transversely through the β-component of each 4-disk and then passes out
of D4 to p5 without intersecting β again, and in particular without intersecting any other disks in the disk
sequence of Φ; again, see Figure 6.6 for an example. Finally, we define the loop Γ ∈ K5 to be the product of
paths γ2 ◦ γ1 .
Now, Γ does not intersect any n-disks in the disk sequence of Φ for n < 4. Moreover, given any 4-disk
in the disk sequence of Φ, Γ intersects the α-component of the disk’s boundary some nonzero number of
times before finally “exiting” the disk at its single point of intersection with the β-component of the disk’s
boundary and continuing on to p5 . This implies that the effect on the 4-disk of pushing p5 along Γ will
be to replace it with a 5-disk containing {p1 , p2 , p3 , p4 , p5 }. As we have already observed, any 4-disk in the
disk sequence of Φ must be sign-changing, and hence the newly created 5-disk replacing is also necessarily
sign-changing.
To summarize, the disk sequence of (β)Γ = (β∗3 )(Φ · Γ) is exactly the same as that of β = (β∗3 )Φ, except that
any 4-disks in the original disk sequence of Φ ∈ B4 have now been replaced by a 5-disk. Hence f (Φ) · Γ ∈ B5
satisfies the parity condition.
Consider next the disk sequence of (β∗3 ) · Γ. We claim that any disk in this sequence is either a 5-disk, a
1-disk containing p5 , or is equivalent to a disk formed with δi for some i ≥ 2 as shown in Figure 6.5; it then
follows that Γ also satisfies the parity condition.
To see this, we first note that by construction γ1 is a simple arc, and we may assume that it admits no
bigon-forming polygons with β∗3 and α. Since γ1 is disjoint from β = (β∗3 )(Φ), and since Φ can be written as
a proper product of the form Φ′ · Γ1 , we may further assume without loss of generality that each α-γ1 disk
is equivalent to one of the five disks shown in Figure 6.5; otherwise we could have made a different choice
of γ1 . It follows that any α-β disks that result from pushing β∗3 along γ1 will also be equivalent to one of
the five disks shown in Figure 6.5, or else it is a 1-disk containing only p5 . In order to complete the push

18

around Γ, we next push along γ2 . As noted above, the effect of doing so will be to replace any existing
4-disks formed in the first stage with 5-disks. The claim follows, and we have established the first statement
of the proposition.
It remains to show that we can always choose Γ to ensure the following statement holds:
ι(α, (β∗3 ) · Γ) ̸= ι(α, (β∗3 )(Φ · Γ))

(2)

Suppose now that in our construction of Γ as above, we have ι(α, (β∗3 ) · Γ) = ι(α, (β∗3 )(Φ · Γ)), or in other
words, ι(α, (β∗3 )Γ) = ι(α, (β)Γ). Our strategy is to alter our construction of the loop Γ slightly so that the
left-hand side of this equality increases, while the right-hand side remains unchanged.
To this end, we will form a new loop Γ′ starting with the same choice of γ1 as before, but we will choose a
different arc γ2′ joining the point q to p5 to replace γ2 , and set Γ′ = γ1 ∪ γ2′ . We note that it is sufficient to
find such an arc γ2′ satisfying the following two properties:
1. as we traverse γ2′ from q to p5 , its first point of intersection with β = (β∗3 ) · (Φ) does not occur until
after its final point of intersection with α; and
2. ι(α, (β∗3 ) · Γ′ ) > ι(α, (β∗3 ) · Γ).
This follows from the fact that the first condition implies that ι(α, (β)Γ′ ) = ι(α, (β)Γ).
Revisiting the construction of Γ, let s denote the final point of intersection of γ1 with α as we travel along
γ1 , and let (γ1 )F denote the subarc of γ1 joining s to the point q. Since D4 \(β ∪ γ1 ) is connected, there
exists an arc γ ′ joining q to a point r ∈ α, where the point r depends on the choice of γ ′ , such that γ ′ is
disjoint from β and such that γ ′ ∩ γ1 = {q}.
We will now consider two cases. First, suppose that γ ′ can be chosen so that, the arc γ ′ ∪ (γ1 )F , together
with the subarc of α joining r to s, forms a disk ∆ containing p1 , p2 , p3 , and p4 .

γ2

γ ′′
r

q
s

γ′

p5

(γ1 )F

D4 ⊆ D5
Figure 6.7: An alternate construction of γ2 : Case 1.
We next look for an arc γ ′′ from r back to q satisfying the following:
1. the arc γ ′′ is disjoint from β;
19

2. γ ′′ ∩ (γ1 ∪ γ ′ ) = {q, r}; and
3. γ ′′ is not isotopic to γ ′ relative to the endpoints {q, r}.
This is equivalent to finding a nontrivial loop based at r in D4 \(β ∪ γ1 ∪ γ ′ ). This is always possible since
β ∩ (γ1 ∪ γ ′ ) = ∅, and hence D4 \(β ∪ γ1 ∪ γ ′ ) is homeomorphic to a disk with three punctures: p1 , p2 , and
p4 . Finally, we set γ2′ = γ ′ ∪ γ ′′ ∪ γ2 , and set Γ′ = γ1 ∪ γ2′ . Since the subarc γ2′ satisfies the two properties
above, we have established the result in this case.
It remains to deal with the case where the arc γ ′ joining q to a point r ∈ α cannot be chosen so that γ ′ ∪(γ1 )F
forms a 4-disk, and hence forms a disk containing a proper subset of {p1 , p2 , p3 , p4 }; recall that we are still
using in this case that γ ′ is disjoint from β and that γ ′ ∩ γ1 = {q}.
We will choose the arc γ ′ to travel from q to a point r ∈ α in parallel to the β-component of the boundary
of the innermost 4-disk; there are two possibilities here. One choice will result in (γ1 )F ∪ γ ′ forming an α-Γ
disk containing k punctures, where k < 4, and the other choice for γ ′ results in an α-Γ disk containing n − k
punctures. Referring to Figure 6.8, we see that here γ ′ is chosen to follow the innermost such β-component
in the right-hand direction (as shown in the figure), so that (γ1 )F ∪ γ ′ forms a 1-disk with α; following to
the left would form a 3-disk instead. In other words, we can assume without loss of generality that the α-Γ
disk formed by (γ1 )F ∪ γ ′ contains at most two punctures.
γ′

q

(γ1 )F

Figure 6.8: The horizontal lines in this figure represent β-components of 4-disks. The choice of the arc γ ′
shown here yields a disk with 1 puncture, by traveling to the right in parallel with the β-component of the
innermost 4-disk.
Our construction now reduces as in the previous case to finding a nontrivial loop based at r in Dn \(β ∪ γ1 ∪
γ ′ ∪ γ ′′ ). Again, this is always possible since β ∩ (γ1 ∪ γ ′ ) = ∅, and since by construction D4 \(β ∪ γ1 ∪ γ ′ ) is
homeomorphic to a disk with at least one puncture. This completes the proof of the proposition.
We remark that the same construction used to find the loop Γ in the proof of Proposition 6.4 could be
iterated to find, for any n, and for any Φ ∈ Bn , some Γ1 , . . . , Γk so that, for the appropriate inclusion map f ,
we have that f (Φ) · Γ1 . . . Γk ∈ Bn+k satisfies the parity condition. The rough idea here is to start with the
innermost disk of each occuring type that does not satisfy the parity condition, and find a suitable push-map
that “corrects” its parity. However, in this case we cannot guarantee that the braid Γ1 . . . Γk satisfies the
parity condition. In our case, the fact the braid Γ also satisfies the parity condition is important in the proof
of our Main Theorem. The fact that we only need to correct one type of disk, so we only require one push
map Γ, is crucial. In the general case where k > 1, we would not be able to simultaneously assume that Γ2
does not cross both β and (β) · Γ1 , and so this argument would fail.

20

The following corollary of Proposition 6.4 enables us to derive conditions on the Moody polynomial of a
push-map Φ ∈ K4 , as part of a proper product.
Corollary 6.5. If Φ ∈ K4 admits a proper product Φ = Φ′ · Γ1 and satisfies ι(α, (β∗3 )Φ) > 0, then there
exists a push-map Γ ∈ K5 such that Mf (Φ)·Γ ̸= MΓ .
Proof. Let Φ be a braid in K4 , and let Γ be an associated push-map in K5 as in the statement of Proposition 6.4. By Proposition 6.4, both Γ and Φ · Γ satisfy the parity condition. It then follows from Lemma 4.2
that there are no cancellations in either of the corresponding Moody polynomials MΓ and Mf (Φ)·Γ .
Let M− and M+ be the lowest and highest exponents that appear in the Moody polynomial Mf (Φ)·Γ , and
′
′
similarly let M−
and M+
denote the corresponding values for MΓ . Then, since neither polynomial has any
cancellations, we can write the corresponding Moody polynomials as follows:
Mf (Φ)·Γ =

M+
X

a j tj

=

|aM− | + · · · + |aM+ | = ι(α, (β∗3 )(f (Φ) · Γ));

bj t j

=

|bM−′ | + · · · + |bM+′ | = ι(α, (β∗3 )Γ).

and

j=M−
′

MΓ =

M+
X
′
j=M−

By Proposition 6.4 we can assume that ι(α, (β∗3 )(f (Φ) · Γ)) ̸= ι(α, (β∗3 )Γ). The result follows.

6.4

Faithfulness on Brun4

As described in Section 1, the proof of our Main Theorem follows from the next result.
Theorem 6.6. The Burau representation ρ4 is faithful on its restriction to Brun4 .
Proof. Let Φ denote a nontrivial element in Brun4 . We make the following elementary observation: Φ ∈
Brun4 lies in the kernel of the Burau representation ρ4 if and only if, for every element y ∈ B4 , the conjugate
yΦy −1 also lies in the kernel of ρ4 . We also recall from our discussion in Section 1 that any nontrivial element
of Brun4 is pseudo-Anosov, and that the image of the arc β∗3 under a pseudo-Anosov map necessarily intersects
the arc α nontrivially.
Given a simple loop such as Γ1 the only possible bigon-forming polygons that can occur are β-to-α trigons
and rectangles. Now, β-to-α trigons can be resolved by an isotopy of β, and rectangles are not possible in
this case since the points of intersection between α and Γ1 alternate in sign as we travel along α.
Furthermore, if we consider Φ and Γ1 as freely reduced words in the free group K4 with respect to the free
basis shown in Figure 6.9, and if the juxtaposition of the two words (yielding the product Φ · Γ1 ) is also
a freely reduced word with respect to this free basis, then the second condition for Φ · Γ1 to be a proper
product is immediately satisfied. One way to see this is to note that, as a freely reduced word in this basis,
Γ1 begins with y2−1 . If Φ · Γ1 is freely reduced, then Φ cannot end with y2 ; if it does, we can replace Φ with
an appropriate conjugate that does not end with y2 . Thus we may assume that Φ has been conjugated so
that it can be written as a proper product Φ = Φ′ · Γ1 for some Φ′ ∈ K4 .
By Corollary 6.5, there is some push-map Γ ∈ K5 < B5 so that Mf (Φ)·Γ ̸= MΓ . It now follows from
Theorem 2.3 that f (Φ) does not lie in the kernel of ρ5 , and hence Φ does not lie in the kernel of ρ4 . Hence
the Burau representation of B4 is faithful on the point-pushing subgroup Brun4 .

21

y3

y2

y1

Figure 6.9: A free basis for K4 .

7

An example

We end with an illustrative example of a push-map Γ ∈ K5 of the form guaranteed by Proposition 6.4. We
will apply Γ to an arc β whose corresponding Moody polynomial admits cancellation, and we will see that
after applying Γ there is no longer any cancellation. Let β denote the arc shown in Figure 7.1. We recall
that an arc β does not uniquely determine a braid Φ such that β = (β∗3 )Φ; nevertheless in what follows it
will be useful to make a choice of such a Φ to simplify notation.
To simplify the calculation while explaining the important parts of the construction, we have chosen to
specify an arc β whose disk sequence satisfies the same properties as those guaranteed by Lemma 6.3, but
our choice of β does not arise as (β∗3 )Φ for any choice of Φ ∈ K4 . (Recall that we restricted to K4 in
Theorem 6.6 in order to ensure that Φ can be written as a proper product Φ = Φ′ · Γ1 , which allows us to
apply Lemma 6.3.) We make this choice for illustrative purposes because the simplest example of an arc β
admitting cancellations, and arising from a proper product of the form Φ = Φ′ · Γ1 ∈ K4 , would have many
more intersections.

Figure 7.1: An example of an arc β whose Moody polynomial admits a cancellation.
Note that any braid Φ inducing the arc β does not satisfy the parity condition. Here and throughout this
appendix, we write the terms of the unsimplified Moody polynomial in order corresponding to points of
intersection of α with β as we travel along β from the basepoint to p3 . We compute the Moody polynomial
for Φ as follows, noting that the linear terms appear with opposite signs, yielding a cancellation.
MΦ

=

t0 + t2 + t4 − t3 − t + t−3 + t−1 + t

=

1 + t2 + t4 − t3 + t−3 + t−1 .

Following the procedure given in the proof of Proposition 6.4, we obtain the loop Γ ∈ K5 shown in Figure 7.2.
Pushing β along Γ gives us β · Γ as shown in Figure 7.3, which now satisfies the parity condition. We next

22

q

Figure 7.2: The push map Γ ∈ K5 shown in gold, with the point q marked from the proof of Proposition 6.4.

Figure 7.3: The image (β)Γ in D5

23

compute the Moody polynomial of the arc Φ · Γ:
MΦ·Γ (t)

=

t0 + t2 + t4 − t3 − t + t−4 + t−2 + t0

=

2 + t2 + t4 − t3 − t + t−4 + t−2 .

Comparing with our calculation of the unsimplified Moody polynomial of Φ above, we see that the effect of
Γ on the Moody polynomial has been to increase the exponent of each the last three terms (those following
the appearance of the 5-disk) by 1, and there is no longer any cancellation.
Furthermore, the arc (β∗3 ) · Γ determining the Moody polynomial of Γ is shown in Figure 7.4 and satisfies
the parity condition as well. The unsimplified Moody polynomial for the arc (β∗3 ) · Γ has 20 terms; the key
point here is that any β-arc satisfying the parity condition may have any number of terms appearing with
equal exponents, but every term with the same exponent will have the same sign.
MΓ (t)

=

−t0 − t2 + t + t−1 − t0 − t2 + t3 + t + t−1 − t−2 − t0 + t−1 + t−3 − t−2 − t0 + t + t−1 + t−3 − t−2 − t0

=

2t−3 − 3t−2 + 4t−1 − 5 + 3t − 2t2 + t3 .

Figure 7.4: The image (β∗3 ) · Γ in D5 .

References
[AFN02] Roger C. Alperin, Benson Farb, and Guennadi A. Noskov. A Strong Schottky Lemma for Nonpositively Curved Singular Spaces. Geometriae Dedicata, 92(1):235–243, July 2002.
[BB05] Joan S. Birman and Tara E. Brendle. Braids: a survey. In Handbook of knot theory, pages 19–103.
Elsevier B. V., Amsterdam, 2005.
[Big99] Stephen Bigelow. The Burau representation is not faithful for n = 5. Geom. Topol., 3:397–404,
1999.

24

[Bir74] Joan S. Birman. Braids, links, and mapping class groups. Princeton University Press, Princeton,
N.J.; University of Tokyo Press, Tokyo, 1974. Annals of Mathematics Studies, No. 82.
[BT18a] A. Beridze and P. Traczyk. Burau representation for n = 4. J. Knot Theory Ramifications,
27(3):1840002, 6, 2018.
[BT18b] A. Beridze and P. Traczyk. Forks, noodles and the Burau representation for n = 4. Trans. A.
Razmadze Math. Inst., 172(3):337–353, 2018.
[Bur35] Werner Burau. Über Zopfgruppen und gleichsinnig verdrillte Verkettungen. Abh. Math. Sem. Univ.
Hamburg, 11(1):179–186, 1935.
[CI17]

Matthieu Calvez and Tetsuya Ito. A Garside-theoretic analysis of the Burau representations. J.
Knot Theory Ramifications, 26(7):1750040, 29, 2017.

[Dat22] Amitesh Datta. A strong characterization of the entries of the Burau matrices of 4-braids: The
Burau representation of the braid group B4 is faithful almost everywhere. Preprint, 2022.
[Dlu24] Ethan Dlugie. The Burau representation and shapes of polyhedra.
24(5):2787–2805, 2024.

Algebr. Geom. Topol.,

[FM12] Benson Farb and Dan Margalit. A primer on mapping class groups, volume 49 of Princeton Mathematical Series. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2012.
[FS19]

Neil J. Fullarton and Richard Shadrach. Observed periodicity related to the four-strand Burau
representation. Exp. Math., 28(1):57–66, 2019.

[GWY25] Joel Gibson, Geordie Williamson, and Oded Yacobi. 4-strand Burau is unfaithful modulo 5. J.
Exp. Math., 1(1):36–50, 2025.
[Jon87] V. F. R. Jones. Hecke algebra representations of braid groups and link polynomials. Annals of
Mathematics, 126(2):335–388, 1987.
[Kas08] Yasushi Kasahara. Remarks on the faithfulness of the Jones representations. In Groups of diffeomorphisms, volume 52 of Adv. Stud. Pure Math., pages 369–381. Math. Soc. Japan, Tokyo, 2008.
[Lon86] D. D. Long. A note on the normal subgroups of mapping class groups. Math. Proc. Cambridge
Philos. Soc., 99(1):79–87, 1986.
[LP93]

D. D. Long and M. Paton. The Burau representation is not faithful for n ≥ 6. Topology, 32(2):439–
447, 1993.

[LS05]

Sang Jin Lee and Won Taek Song. The kernel of Burau(4) ⊗ Zp is all pseudo-Anosov. Pacific J.
Math., 219(2):303–310, 2005.

[Mar19] Dan Margalit. Problems, questions, and conjectures about mapping class groups. In Breadth in
contemporary topology, volume 102 of Proc. Sympos. Pure Math., pages 157–186. Amer. Math. Soc.,
Providence, RI, 2019.
[Moo91] John Atwell Moody. The Burau representation of the braid group Bn is unfaithful for large n. Bull.
Amer. Math. Soc. (N.S.), 25(2):379–384, 1991.
[Mor91] Siegfried Moran. Some free groups of matrices and the Burau representation of B4 . Math. Proc.
Cambridge Philos. Soc., 110(2):225–228, 1991.
[MP69] Wilhelm Magnus and Ada Peluso. On a theorem of V. I. Arnold. Comm. Pure Appl. Math.,
22:683–692, 1969.

25

[Whi00] Whittlesey, Kim. Normal all pseudo-Anosov subgroups of mapping class groups. Geom. Topol.,
4:293–307, 2000.
[WZ15] Stefan Witzel and Matthew C. B. Zaremsky. A free subgroup in the image of the 4-strand Burau
representation. J. Knot Theory Ramifications, 24(12):1550065, 16, 2015.

26

